
# Economic voting, media and partisanship.

## Introduction

I replicate and extend an earlier paper on comparative economic voting by Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien (2015). Their analysis supports the proposition that media coverage and the public react to changes in or levels of economic activity, and the past, present, or future economy. According to their model, media coverage anticipates change in the future economy, and this both influences and is influenced by public evaluation. Specifically, they use Error Correction Models (ECMs) to first capture relative impact of short- versus long-term effects of economy on media content. For example, here short-run effect of media means to what extent current change over time period t − 1 to t in economic indicators affects the current change in media content; long-term effect refers to the total effect that economic indices have on media coverage over time period t + 1 to t + k. Then the authors also provide short term and long term effects of media coverage on public opinion, and the opposite relationship. In addition to highlighting the importance of media’s effect, Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien (2015) focuses on both volume or tone of media coverage. First, consider work suggesting that, since gathering and processing information about the economy is costly, people do not continuously update their expectations but rather do so only occasionally and remain largely inattentive in between. Expectation updating occurs when there are high volumes of economic news, and economic news tends to be most frequent when the economy is bad. Second, the newspaper coverage is not impartial. They are privately owned and may tend to reflect the views of the owners. It follows that individuals’ expectations may be a product of media tone.

However, methodologically, before using ECMs, Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien (2015) fails to consider the properties of these time series. Moreover, the authors fail to ensure that their equations are balanced. The order of integration needs to be consistent across all series in a model (Grant and Lebo, 2015). Thus, in this paper, I will start with non-stationary test and unit root test for the variables to check whether these time series exhibit an consistent I(d) process. Then I will test the co-integration among these variables to test whether an ECM is necessary for examining the long-run relationship. The main goal of this assignment is to see: 1) whether ECMs model is appropriate for these variables; 2) whether we can obtain same results about the relationship between media content and the economy, and the relationship between media and public opinion, if ECMs models are necessary.

The current paper is composed of two parts. First, the paper starts with non- stationary test and unit root test and tries to replicate Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien’ paper (SSW) to see whether we can obtain same results about the relationship between media content and the economy, and the relationship between media and public opinion. Second, the paper extends Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien’ paper in examining the role of partisanship in the relationship between media and public evaluation. In the recent research in the field of communication, there is an ever pervasive belief in various forms of media bias. In the U.S., over the past two decades, the dominant belief regarding media bias is that that the mainstream news media favor liberal causes and political candidates (Nisbet, M. C., and Feldman, L., 2011). Yet researchers are unable to find definitive evidence for systematic partisan bias in coverage of elections (D’Alessio D. and Allen, 2000). In contrast, Niven (2001) finds that little evidence of partisan media bias in the U.S by comparing coverage when members of both parties have engaged in the same behavior. Thus, I consider partisan media bias is worthy to be examined in the extension. Further- more, when we talk about the traditional class voting, we usually assume a close correspondence between the working class and Democratic party and between the upper class and Republican party. Moreover, in the field of partisan political econ- omy, there is consistent difference in policies and priorities between Democratic and Republican administrations. Consequently, this significant partisan differences in macroeconomic, tax and transfer policies have produced significant partisan dispar- ities in patterns of post-tax income growth among different social classes (Bartels, 2009). Hence, it is interesting to test whether social classes’ opinion varies with presidential partisanship, and to analyze reasons behind this difference.

For these reasons, I extend Soroka, Stecula and Wlezien’ paper in three ways. First, methodologically, before using ECMs, the paper fails to consider the properties of these time series. Moreover, the authors fail to ensure that their equations are balanced. The order of integration needs to be consistent across all series in a model (Grant and Lebo, 2015). Thus, in this part, I start with unit root test for the variables to check whether these time series exhibit an consistent I(1) process. Then I would test the cointegration among these variables to test whether an ECM is necessary for examining the long-run relationship. Second, if an ECM model is necessary, I add a categorical explanatory variable “political party identity of incumbent” across time. In the U.S. context, the political party of incumbent is either Democratic or Republican party. The use of two categories, enables us to analyze whether the economic performance are different among two incumbent parties. If the economic indices differ with political party identity of the incumbent, it enables us to further examine whether consumers’ sentiment varies with real economic performance, or their sentiment is influenced by other factors. Moreover, this party identity enables to us to demonstrate whether the media responds differently in areas where the incumbent is a Republican or a Democrat. Third, I consider whether at the national level social class measured by personal income plays a role in public sentiment since different social classes will be differently sensitive to eco- nomic indices, and also have varying preferences over political parties. If it is true that evaluation of different social class varies with the incumbent partisanship, we have to ask why it happens. For instance, is it income inequality or unemployment rate which are different for Democratic and Republican administrations that affects the opinion?


